Add blog article on writing labelling controller (#27010)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2021-XX-XX-writing-a-controller-for-pod-labels.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Writing a Controller for Pod Labels"
date: 2021-03-XX
slug: writing-a-controller-for-pod-labels
---

**Authors**: Arthur Busser, Padok

[Operators][what-is-an-operator] are proving to be an excellent solution to
running stateful distributed applications in Kubernetes. Open Source tools like
the [Operator SDK][operator-sdk] provide ways to build reliable and maintainable
operators, and extending Kubernetes to implement custom scheduling needs is now
easier than ever.

Kubernetes operators run complex software inside your cluster. The open-source
community has already built [many operators][operatorhub] for distributed
applications like Prometheus, ElasticSearch, or ArgoCD. Even outside of
open-source, operators can help to bring new functionality to your Kubernetes
cluster.

An Operator is a set of [custom resources][custom-resource-definitions] and a
set of [controllers][controllers] that, when combined, run complex software
inside your Kubernetes cluster. A controller watches for changes to specific
resources in the Kubernetes API and reacts by creating, updating, or deleting

> resources.

Reviewer: Hi again @busser 

I recommend revising this background to explain that the “Operator SDK” is also useful if you're implementing a controller that doesn't fit the operator pattern.

Author: Done 👍

INFO    controllers.Pod no update required  {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
```

Lets check the Pod's labels:

```terminal
$ kubectl get pod my-nginx --show-labels
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   LABELS
my-nginx   1/1     Running   0          11m   run=my-nginx
```

Let's add an annotation to the Pod so that our controller knows to add our
dynamic label to it:

```bash
kubectl annotate pod my-nginx padok.fr/add-pod-name-label=true
```

Notice that the controller immediately reacted and produced a new line in its
logs:

```text
INFO    controllers.Pod adding label    {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
```

```terminal
$ kubectl get pod my-nginx --show-labels
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   LABELS
my-nginx   1/1     Running   0          13m   padok.fr/pod-name=my-nginx,run=my-nginx
```

Bravo! You just successfully wrote a Kubernetes controller capable of adding
labels with dynamic values to resources in your cluster.

Controller and, more generally, operators both big and small, can be an
important part of your Kubernetes journey. Writing operators is easier now than
it has ever been. The possibilities are endless.

## What next?

> If you want to go further, I recommend starting by deploying the operator inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to go further, I recommend starting by deploying your controller or operator inside
```

Author: Change applied 👍

a cluster. The `Makefile` generated by the Operator SDK will do most of the
work.

When deploying an operator to production, it is always a good idea to implement
robust testing. The first step in that direction is to write unit tests.
[This documentation][operator-sdk-testing] will guide you in writing tests for
your operator. I wrote tests for the operator we just wrote; you can find all of
my code in [this GitHub repository][github-repo].

## How to learn more?

The [Operator SDK documentation][operator-sdk-docs] goes into detail on how you
can go further and implement more complex operators.

When built-in Kubernetes types are not enough to model your use-case, you will

> need to use [Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs)][custom-resource-definitions].

Reviewer: I'd reword this to fit the context that the article explained writing a controller, but of course the Operator SDK is also good for writing operators.

Author: Done 👍

If you want to discuss building an operator, hit me up on Twitter [@ArthurBusser][twitter-profile]!

The company I work for, [Padok][padok], can also help you develop a robust

> operator for your distributed application.

Reviewer: We don't accept this kind of promotional message.

Author: Understood. I'd really like to link back to the company I work for. What would be an appropriate way to do so?

Author: For instance, would this be OK?

```markdown
I work for a company called [Padok][padok], where I solve problems with Kubernetes.
```

Reviewer 2: Howdy, @busser 👋🏼 Our content policy keeps the docs focused on helping developers and cluster admins rather than marketing. At this time, we'd appreciate removing any [third-party or dual-sourced content](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/05/third-party-dual-sourced-content/).

Author: Hi @onlydole 👋 Thank you for referring me to that documentation! I've changed the final line of my post to match [this recent blog article](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2020/12/21/writing-crl-scheduler/). Is this new form appropriate?

---
layout: blog
title: "Writing a Controller for Pod Labels"

> date: 2021-03-XX

Reviewer 3: Set the date.

Author: What date should I use? 🤔

Reviewer 3: @sftim Can you answer this question?

Reviewer 3: @busser - Please update this with the current date. For example, `date: 2021-04-29`. (Okay @sftim?)

Author: I've set the date to `2021-05-04` 👍

slug: writing-a-controller-for-pod-labels
---

**Authors**: Arthur Busser, Padok

[Operators][what-is-an-operator] are proving to be an excellent solution to

> running stateful distributed applications in Kubernetes. Open Source tools like

Reviewer 3: s/Open Source/open source/

Author: Done 👍

the [Operator SDK][operator-sdk] provide ways to build reliable and maintainable

> operators, and extending Kubernetes to implement custom scheduling needs is now

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
operators, making it easier to extend Kubernetes and implement custom scheduling needs.```

Reviewer 3: and remove "is now easier than ever."

Reviewer: @rolfedh I took the liberty of fixing https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/27010/files#r619728267 to match what i think you intended to suggest.

Author: Done 👍

> easier than ever.

Reviewer 3: Maybe strike "easier than ever."

> Kubernetes operators run complex software inside your cluster. The open-source

Reviewer 3: Use "open source" or "open-source" consistently throughout. This blog seems to prefer "open source" (214 instances) over "open-source" (57 instances).

Author: I've opted for "open source" 👍

community has already built [many operators][operatorhub] for distributed

> applications like Prometheus, ElasticSearch, or ArgoCD. Even outside of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Elasticsearch, or Argo CD
```

Reviewer: The original seems OK @rolfedh ?

Reviewer 3: Updated the suggestion to show the full line. The suggestion shows the correct capitalization and spacing of those two software names.

Author: Done 👍

open-source, operators can help to bring new functionality to your Kubernetes
cluster.

An Operator is a set of [custom resources][custom-resource-definitions] and a
set of [controllers][controllers] that, when combined, run complex software
inside your Kubernetes cluster. A controller watches for changes to specific
resources in the Kubernetes API and reacts by creating, updating, or deleting
resources.

> The Operator SDK is best suited for building fully fledged operators.

Reviewer 3: s/fully fledged/fully-fledged/

Reviewer: If hypenating (US style), I think _full-fledged_ is idiomatic.

Nonetheless, you can use it to write a single controller. This post will walk
you through writing a Kubernetes controller in Go that will add a `pod-name`

> label to Pods that have a specific annotation.

Reviewer 3: I'm not certain, but i think you can make "pods" lower-case throughout.

Author: Done 👍

## Why do we need a controller for this?

> I recently worked on a project where we needed to create a Service that routed

Reviewer 3: This is really helpful. Hearing you ("I" and "we") relate your experiences and that of your team or organization gives weight to the use story you're telling.

Author: Do you think I should add more or is this enough?

Reviewer 3: This is good. I don't want to add more review cycles.

traffic to a specific Pod in a ReplicaSet. The problem is that a Service can
only select Pods by label, and all pods in a ReplicaSet have the same labels.
There are two ways to solve this problem:

1. Create a Service without a selector and manage the Endpoints or
   EndpointSlices for that Service directly. We would need to write a custom
   controller to insert our Pod's IP address into those resources.
2. Add a label to the Pod a unique value. We could then use this label in our
   Service's selector. Again, we would need to write a custom controller to add
   this label.

> A controller is a control-loop that tracks one or more Kubernetes resource

Reviewer 3: s/control-loop/control loop/

Author: Done 👍

types. The controller from option n°2 above only needs to track Pods, which

> makes it simpler to implement. This is the option we are going to walk through

Reviewer 3: Here, you start using "we" to mean me, the author, and you, the reader. I think your intention is to be polite. However, it would be more natural and personal to use "I and you". For example, "This is the option I'm going to walk you through..."
Later, you flip back and forth between "we" and "you" a bit. I think you can comfortably speak directly to the reader, like they're  a good friend or colleague who has asked you to show them how to do something difficult.

Reviewer 3: The style guide recommends [addressing the reader as you](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#address-the-reader-as-you).

Reviewer: For a blog it's OK to use “we” provided it's clear from context who “we” are (eg a SIG, multiple authors, explicitly the author and reader together).

Reviewer 3: Sorry, @busser. This is my first review of a post for the Kubernetes blog. I misapplied the style guide for technical documentation to these blog posts. You can ignore my suggestions about converting "we and let's" phrases to you and I.

Pod's name. Disappointingly, this does not work: not all Pods have a name before
being created. For instance, when the ReplicaSet controller creates a Pod, it
sends a `namePrefix` to the Kubernetes API server and not a `name`. The API
server generates a unique name before persisting the new Pod to etcd, but only
after calling our admission webhook. So in most cases, we can't know a Pod's
name with a mutating webhook.

Once a Pod exists in the Kubernetes API, it is mostly immutable, but we can
still add a label. We can even do so from the command line:

```bash
kubectl label my-pod my-label-key=my-label-value
```

We need to watch for changes to any Pods in the Kubernetes API and add the label
we want. Rather than do this manually, we are going to write a controller that
does it for us.

## Bootstrapping a controller with the Operator SDK

An operator is a set of controllers that, when combined, serve to manage an
application running inside Kubernetes. A controller is a reconciliation loop
that reads the desired state of a resource from the Kubernetes API and takes
action to bring the cluster's actual state closer to the desired state.

> In order to write this controller as quickly as possible, we are going to use

Reviewer 3: s/In order to/To/

the Operator SDK. If you don't have it installed, follow the
[official documentation][operator-sdk-installation].

```terminal

> $ operator-sdk version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
operator-sdk version
```
https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#don-t-include-the-command-prompt

Reviewer 3: You can ignore this suggestion.

> operator-sdk version: "v1.4.2", commit: "4b083393be65589358b3e0416573df04f4ae8d9b", kubernetes version: "v1.19.4", go version: "go1.15.8", GOOS: "darwin", GOARCH: "amd64"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
The output is similar to this:
```terminal
operator-sdk version: "v1.4.2", commit: "4b083393be65589358b3e0416573df04f4ae8d9b", kubernetes version: "v1.19.4", go version: "go1.15.8", GOOS: "darwin", GOARCH: "amd64"
```
[Separate commands from output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output)

Reviewer 3: @busser, You can ignore this suggestion.

```

Let's create a new directory to write our controller in:

```bash
mkdir label-operator && cd label-operator
```

> Next, let's initialize a new operator, to which we will add a single controller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, initialize a new operator and add a single controller to it.
```
In general, [use the present tense](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-present-tense).

Reviewer 3: @busser, You can ignore this suggestion.

to. Because we are not going to be defining custom resources, the domain does
not matter. The repository is going to be the name of the Go module we are going
to write. By convention, this is the repository where you will be storing your
code.

As an example, here is the command I ran:

```bash
# Feel free to change the domain and repo values.
operator-sdk init --domain=padok.fr --repo=github.com/busser/label-operator
```

Next, we need a create a new controller. This controller will handle Pods and
not a custom resource, so no need to generate the resource code. Let's run this
command to scaffold the code we need:

```bash
operator-sdk create api --group=core --version=v1 --kind=Pod --controller=true --resource=false
```

We now have a new file: `controllers/pod_controller.go`. This file contains a
`PodReconciler` type with two methods that we need to implement. The first is
`Reconcile`, and it looks like this for now:

```go
func (r *PodReconciler) Reconcile(ctx context.Context, req ctrl.Request) (ctrl.Result, error) {
    _ = r.Log.WithValues("pod", req.NamespacedName)

    // your logic here

    return ctrl.Result{}, nil
}
```

> `Reconcile` will get called whenever a Pod is created, updated, or deleted. The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `Reconcile` file is called whenever a pod is created, updated, or deleted.
```
[Starting a sentence with a component tool or component name](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#starting-a-sentence-with-a-component-tool-or-component-name)

Author: Done 👍

name and namespace of the Pod are in the `ctrl.Request` the method receives as a
parameter.

The second method is `SetupWithManager` and for now it looks like this:

```go
func (r *PodReconciler) SetupWithManager(mgr ctrl.Manager) error {
    return ctrl.NewControllerManagedBy(mgr).
        // Uncomment the following line adding a pointer to an instance of the controlled resource as an argument
        // For().
        Complete(r)
}
```

> `SetupWithManager` is called when the operator starts. It serves to tell the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `SetupWithManager` method is called when the operator starts. It serves to tell the
```
https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#starting-a-sentence-with-a-component-tool-or-component-name

Author: Done 👍

operator framework what types our `PodReconciler` needs to watch. To use the
same `Pod` type used by Kubernetes internally, we need to import some of its
code. All of the Kubernetes source code is open source, so you can import any
part you like in your own Go code. You can find a complete list of available
packages in the Kubernetes source code or [here on pkg.go.dev][pkg-go-dev]. To
use Pods, we need the `k8s.io/api/core/v1` package.

```go
package controllers

import (
    // other imports...
    corev1 "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
    // other imports...
)
```

> Lets use the `Pod` type in `SetupWithManager` to tell the operator framework we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the `Pod` type in `SetupWithManager` to tell the operator framework you
```
An example of switching from "we" to "you".

Reviewer 3: @busser, You can ignore this suggestion.

```go
    return ctrl.Result{}, nil
}
```

And that's it! We are now ready to run the controller on our cluster.

## Run the controller on your cluster

To run our controller on your cluster, we need to run the operator. For that,
all you will need is `kubectl`. If you don't have a Kubernetes cluster at hand,
I recommend you start one locally with [KinD (Kubernetes in Docker)][kind].

All it takes to run the operator from your machine is this command:

```bash
make run
```

After a few seconds, you should see the operator's logs. Notice that our
controller's `Reconcile` method was called for all Pods already running in the
cluster.

Let's keep the operator running and, in another terminal, create a new Pod:

```bash
kubectl run --image=nginx my-nginx
```

The operator should quickly print some logs, indicating that it reacted to the
Pod's creation and subsequent changes in status:

```text
INFO    controllers.Pod no update required  {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
INFO    controllers.Pod no update required  {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
INFO    controllers.Pod no update required  {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
INFO    controllers.Pod no update required  {"pod": "default/my-nginx"}
```

> Lets check the Pod's labels:

Reviewer 3: Where it means "let us", replace /Lets/Let's/ and s/lets/let's/. (multiple instances)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check the pod's labels:
```

Reviewer 3: @busser, you can ignore this suggestion.

important part of your Kubernetes journey. Writing operators is easier now than
it has ever been. The possibilities are endless.

## What next?

If you want to go further, I recommend starting by deploying your controller or
operator inside a cluster. The `Makefile` generated by the Operator SDK will do
most of the work.

When deploying an operator to production, it is always a good idea to implement
robust testing. The first step in that direction is to write unit tests.
[This documentation][operator-sdk-testing] will guide you in writing tests for
your operator. I wrote tests for the operator we just wrote; you can find all of
my code in [this GitHub repository][github-repo].

## How to learn more?

The [Operator SDK documentation][operator-sdk-docs] goes into detail on how you
can go further and implement more complex operators.

When modeling a more complex use-case, a single controller acting on built-in
Kubernetes types may not be enough. You may need to build a fully fledged
operator with [Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs)][custom-resource-definitions]
and multiple controllers. The Operator SDK is a great tool to help you do this.

> If you want to discuss building an operator, hit me up on Twitter [@ArthurBusser][twitter-profile]!

Reviewer: I'd omit this.

Reviewer: We could instead mention a Slack channel, eg https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/kubernetes-operators (if so, also link to https://slack.k8s.io/ so people know how to join).

Author: Great idea! I've changed the article to refer the Slack channel rather than my Twitter account 👍

---

_[Arthur Busser][twitter-profile] is a site reliability engineer at

> [Padok][padok] where he works on tooling and automation._

Reviewer: In the Kubernetes blog, we rarely include this kind of final paragraph about the author at all. Interested parties can search the web for “Arthur Busser Padok” and learn more if they want to.

Reviewer 3: @busser, the blog post's byline will display your name and organization at the top of the article. Would you mind removing these two lines?

Author: Done 👍

---
layout: blog
title: "Writing a Controller for Pod Labels"
date: 2021-03-XX
slug: writing-a-controller-for-pod-labels
---

> **Authors**: Arthur Busser, Padok

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Authors**: Arthur Busser (Padok)
```
